Programming Challenges
 1. Miles per Gallon
Write a program that calculates a car’s gas mileage. The program should ask the user
to enter the number of gallons of gas the car can hold and the number of miles it can
be driven on a full tank. It should then display the number of miles that may be driven
per gallon of gas.
 2. Stadium Seating
There are three seating categories at a stadium. For a softball game, Class A seats cost
$15, Class B seats cost $12, and Class C seats cost $9. Write a program that asks how
many tickets for each class of seats were sold, then displays the amount of income generated from ticket sales. 
Format your dollar amount in fixed-point notation, with two
decimal places of precision, and be sure the decimal point is always displayed.
 3. Test Average
Write a program that asks for five test scores. The program should calculate the average test score and display it. 
The number displayed should be formatted in fixed-point
notation, with one decimal point of precision.
 4. Average Rainfall
Write a program that calculates the average rainfall for three months. The program
should ask the user to enter the name of each month, such as June or July, and the
amount of rain (in inches) that fell each month. The program should display a message
similar to the following:
The average rainfall for June, July, and August is 6.72 inches.
 5. Male and Female Percentages
Write a program that asks the user for the number of males and the number of females
registered in a class. The program should display the percentage of males and females
in the class.
Hint: Suppose there are 8 males and 12 females in a class. There are 20 students in the
class. The percentage of males can be calculated as 8 ÷ 20 = 0.4, or 40%. The percentage of females can be 
calculated as 12 ÷ 20 = 0.6, or 60%.

Programming Challenges 143
 6. Ingredient Adjuster
A cookie recipe calls for the following ingredients:
• 1.5 cups of sugar
• 1 cup of butter
• 2.75 cups of flour
The recipe produces 48 cookies with this amount of the ingredients. Write a program
that asks the user how many cookies he or she wants to make, and then displays the
number of cups of each ingredient needed for the specified number of cookies.
 7. Box Office
A movie theater only keeps a percentage of the revenue earned from ticket sales. The
remainder goes to the movie distributor. Write a program that calculates a theater’s
gross and net box office profit for a night. The program should ask for the name of the
movie, and how many adult and child tickets were sold. (The price of an adult ticket is
$10.00 and a child’s ticket is $6.00.) It should display a report similar to
Movie Name: “Wheels of Fury”
Adult Tickets Sold: 382
Child Tickets Sold: 127
Gross Box Office Profit: $ 4582.00
Net Box Office Profit: $ 916.40
Amount Paid to Distributor: $ 3665.60
NOTE: Assume the theater keeps 20 percent of the gross box office profit.
 8. How Many Widgets?
The Yukon Widget Company manufactures widgets that weigh 12.5 pounds each.
Write a program that calculates how many widgets are stacked on a pallet, based on
the total weight of the pallet. The program should ask the user how much the pallet
weighs by itself and with the widgets stacked on it. It should then calculate and display
the number of widgets stacked on the pallet.
 9. How Many Calories?
A bag of cookies holds 30 cookies. The calorie information on the bag claims that there
are 10 “servings” in the bag and that a serving equals 300 calories. Write a program
that asks the user to input how many cookies he or she actually ate and then reports
how many total calories were consumed.
10. How Much Insurance?
Many financial experts advise that property owners should insure their homes or buildings for at least 80 percent of the amount it would cost to replace the structure. Write a
program that asks the user to enter the replacement cost of a building and then displays
the minimum amount of insurance he or she should buy for the property.
11. Automobile Costs
Write a program that asks the user to enter the monthly costs for the following
expenses incurred from operating his or her automobile: loan payment, insurance, gas,
oil, tires, and maintenance. The program should then display the total monthly cost of
these expenses, and the total annual cost of these expenses.
12. Celsius to Fahrenheit
Write a program that converts Celsius temperatures to Fahrenheit temperatures. 
13. Currency
Write a program that will convert U.S. dollar amounts to Japanese yen and to euros,
storing the conversion factors in the constants YEN_PER_DOLLAR and EUROS_PER_
DOLLAR. To get the most up-to-date exchange rates, search the Internet using the
term “currency exchange rate”. If you cannot find the most recent exchange rates, use
the following:
1 Dollar = 98.93 Yen
1 Dollar = 0.74 Euros
Format your currency amounts in fixed-point notation, with two decimal places of
precision, and be sure the decimal point is always displayed.
14. Monthly Sales Tax
A retail company must file a monthly sales tax report listing the sales for the month and
the amount of sales tax collected. Write a program that asks for the month, the year,
and the total amount collected at the cash register (that is, sales plus sales tax). Assume
the state sales tax is 4 percent and the county sales tax is 2 percent.
If the total amount collected is known and the total sales tax is 6 percent, the amount
of product sales may be calculated as:
S 
T
1.06
S is the product sales and T is the total income (product sales plus sales tax).
The program should display a report similar to
Month: October
 --------------------
Total Collected: $ 26572.89
Sales: $ 25068.76
County Sales Tax: $ 501.38
State Sales Tax: $ 1002.75
Total Sales Tax: $ 1504.13
15. Property Tax
A county collects property taxes on the assessment value of property, which is 60 percent of the property’s actual value. If an acre of land is valued at $10,000, its assessment
value is $6,000. The property tax is then 75¢ for each $100 of the assessment value.
The tax for the acre assessed at $6,000 will be $45. Write a program that asks for the
actual value of a piece of property and displays the assessment value and property tax.
16. Senior Citizen Property Tax
Madison County provides a $5,000 homeowner exemption for its senior citizens. For
example, if a senior’s house is valued at $158,000 its assessed value would be $94,800,
144 Chapter 3 Expressions and Interactivity
Programming Challenges 145
as explained above. However, he would only pay tax on $89,800. At last year’s tax
rate of $2.64 for each $100 of assessed value, the property tax would be $2,370.72. In
addition to the tax break, senior citizens are allowed to pay their property tax in four
equal payments. The quarterly payment due on this property would be $592.68. Write
a program that asks the user to input the actual value of a piece of property and the
current tax rate for each $100 of assessed value. The program should then calculate
and report how much annual property tax a senior homeowner will be charged for this
property and what the quarterly tax bill will be.
17. Math Tutor
Write a program that can be used as a math tutor for a young student. The program
should display two random numbers to be added, such as
 247
129
The program should then pause while the student works on the problem. When the
student is ready to check the answer, he or she can press a key and the program will
display the correct solution:
 247
129
 376
18. Interest Earned
Assuming there are no deposits other than the original investment, the balance in a
savings account after one year may be calculated as
Amount = Principal *(1 +
Rate
T )T
Principal is the balance in the savings account, Rate is the interest rate, and T is
the number of times the interest is compounded during a year ( T is 4 if the interest is
compounded quarterly).
Write a program that asks for the principal, the interest rate, and the number of times
the interest is compounded. It should display a report similar to
Interest Rate: 4.25%
Times Compounded: 12
Principal: $ 1000.00
Interest: $ 43.34
Amount in Savings: $ 1043.34
19. Monthly Payments
The monthly payment on a loan may be calculated by the following formula:
Payment = Rate *(1 + Rate)N
((1 + Rate)N - 1) * L
Rate is the monthly interest rate, which is the annual interest rate divided by 12. (12%
annual interest would be 1 percent monthly interest.) N is the number of payments, and
L is the amount of the loan. Write a program that asks for these values and displays a
report similar to
Loan Amount: $ 10000.00
Monthly Interest Rate: 1%
Number of Payments: 36
Monthly Payment: $ 332.14
Amount Paid Back: $ 11957.15
Interest Paid: $ 1957.15
20. Pizza Pi
Joe’s Pizza Palace needs a program to calculate the number of slices a pizza of any size
can be divided into. The program should perform the following steps:
A) Ask the user for the diameter of the pizza in inches.
B) Calculate the number of slices that may be taken from a pizza of that size.
C) Display a message telling the number of slices.
To calculate the number of slices that may be taken from the pizza, you must know
the following facts:
• Each slice should have an area of 14.125 inches.
• To calculate the number of slices, simply divide the area of the pizza by 14.125.
• The area of the pizza is calculated with this formula:
 Area  π r
2
NOTE: π is the Greek letter pi. 3.14159 can be used as its value. The variable r is the
radius of the pizza. Divide the diameter by 2 to get the radius.
Make sure the output of the program displays the number of slices in fixed point notation, rounded to one decimal place of precision. Use a named constant for pi.
21. How Many Pizzas?
Modify the program you wrote in Programming Challenge 18 (Pizza Pi) so that it
reports the number of pizzas you need to buy for a party if each person attending
is expected to eat an average of four slices. The program should ask the user for the
number of people who will be at the party and for the diameter of the pizzas to be
ordered. It should then calculate and display the number of pizzas to purchase.
22. Angle Calculator
Write a program that asks the user for an angle, entered in radians. The program
should then display the sine, cosine, and tangent of the angle. (Use the sin, cos, and
tan library functions to determine these values.) The output should be displayed in
fixed-point notation, rounded to four decimal places of precision.
23. Stock Transaction Program
Last month Joe purchased some stock in Acme Software, Inc. Here are the details of
the purchase:
• The number of shares that Joe purchased was 1,000.
• When Joe purchased the stock, he paid $45.50 per share.
• Joe paid his stockbroker a commission that amounted to 2% of the amount he paid
for the stock.
146 Chapter 3 Expressions and Interactivity
Programming Challenges 147
Two weeks later Joe sold the stock. Here are the details of the sale:
• The number of shares that Joe sold was 1,000.
• He sold the stock for $56.90 per share.
• He paid his stockbroker another commission that amounted to 2% of the amount
he received for the stock.
Write a program that displays the following information:
• The amount of money Joe paid for the stock.
• The amount of commission Joe paid his broker when he bought the stock.
• The amount that Joe sold the stock for.
• The amount of commission Joe paid his broker when he sold the stock.
• Display the amount of profit that Joe made after selling his stock and paying the two
commissions to his broker. (If the amount of profit that your program displays is a
negative number, then Joe lost money on the transaction.)
24. Word Game
Write a program that plays a word game with the user. The program should ask the
user to enter the following:
• His or her name
• His or her age
• The name of a city
• The name of a college
• A profession
• A type of animal
• A pet’s name
After the user has entered these items, the program should display the following story,
inserting the user’s input into the appropriate locations:
There once was a person named NAME who lived in CITY . At the age of
AGE, NAME went to college at COLLEGE. NAME graduated and went to work
as a PROFESSION. Then, NAME adopted a(n) ANIMAL named PETNAME. They
both lived happily ever after!